
Some letters from New York have said, "If you are ever in battle, do
describe it." In this curiosity I have myself shared, and have always
longed to know not only how the scene appeared, but how the spectator
felt. I am able now to answer the question, and in so doing I will try
and describe to you precisely how the attack appeared to me, without
entering into an account of anything but what I saw, and how I felt.

It was by accident that I was at Fort Donelson, and with the attacking
column. My regiment left me at St. Louis attending a court-martial.
The court adjourned soon afterward, and then, with another member, an
officer of the Fourteenth Iowa, I started for Fort Henry.

We descended the Mississippi to the narrow point where the Ohio joins
it, and on which are the fortifications of Cairo. At Cairo there were
no boats, save those of the government, conveying troops, and on one of
these we went. It was the McGill, and on board was the regiment which
was to lead the assault at Fort Donelson, the Second Iowa.

Up to the time of starting we supposed that the destination of the
boat was Fort Henry, on the Tennessee. It was then announced, Fort
Donelson on the Cumberland. We glided slowly up the Ohio, against
its swollen current, and passed the mouth of the Tennessee during the
night. I arose with the first gleam of light, and went on deck to find
that we had entered the Cumberland. It seemed a narrow river, winding
amid wooded hills and banks covered with noble oaks. The soldiers,
who had passed the warm, moonlit night on deck, were rising, one by
one, folding blankets and packing knapsacks. I turned from them to the
river, and looked curiously for the people who dwelt in this, the rebel
part of Kentucky.

For a short time there was nothing but woods. Then a little log house
appeared upon the bank, a shed beside it, with its single horse and
cow. It was a humble home, and hardly worth a second glance, a hundred
such might be seen on the banks of any river; but in front of the door
stood a sturdy little flag-staff, and from it waved the stars and
stripes. The family had risen at the sound of the steamer. The mother
stood in the doorway, holding an infant, and waving an apron. A little
girl near by timidly tossed her hood around her head. Two ragged boys
at the water's edge swung their caps joyfully. The father stood on a
stump, hurrahing alone but lustily; and over them, in the dim grey
light, fluttered their little flag. "They mean it," "They are honest,"
"There's no make-believe there," were the exclamations of the soldiers,
as they crowded to the side of the boat and answered the father and his
boys with their louder cheers. This was the first house we saw, and
the warmest welcome we received; for though many hats were waved to us
during the day, and a few flags shown, none equalled, in their manifest
sincerity, the inmates of the little log house.

The day was soft and beautiful. We passed it upon the upper deck,
laughing, chatting, and watching the shifting scenery of the winding
river. A pleasure excursion it seemed to all; and again and again some
one would remark, "We may be on the brink of battle, yet it seems as
though we were travelling for pleasure."

Among the rough exteriors which campaigning gives, two officers of
the Second were remarkable for their neat appearance. Some jokes were
made at their expense, calling them the dandies of the regiment, and
their state-rooms the band-boxes; and it was agreed that they were
too handsome to be spoilt by scars. Two days afterward one of these,
Captain Sleighmaker, fell at the head of his company, heroically
charging the rebel breastworks. A little later, as I was galloping
for the surgeons, I passed a wounded officer, borne by four soldiers
in a blanket. As I rode by he called out, "We have carried the day,
Captain." I looked around and saw it was the other, Major Chipman. "Are
you badly hurt, Major?" I said, pulling up my horse. "No, not badly,"
he answered. "Don't stop for me;" and when the surgeon arrived he
refused to have his wound dressed, and sent him to his men.

In the afternoon we overtook twenty steamboats laden with troops, and
led by four black gunboats. They moved slowly and kept together, as
if they feared approaching danger. Then came a change of weather, and
night closed in upon us, dark and dreary, with cold and snow.

When the next morning broke I found we had made fast to the western
shore. On either bank were high and wooded hills. The gunboats lay
anchored in the middle of the stream, all signs of life hidden beneath
their dark decks, save the white steam that slowly issued from their
pipes, and floated gracefully away. Far down the river could be seen
the troop-laden transports, moored to the trees along the bank. The
sky was clear and bright; the forest sparkled with snow, and the warm
waters of the river smoked in the frosty air. Such a picture I have
never seen--never shall see again. As the troops began to debark,
the band of the Second Iowa came out on the upper deck, and the dear
"Star-spangled" echoed along the river. The men beat time, and hurrahed
as the notes died away.

The place of landing was about three miles below Fort Donelson. I may
here say that the fort itself is about half as large as the Battery,
but that it is only a corner of a large square of earthworks stretching
some two miles on each side. To avoid the cannon on the works it was
necessary for us to make a circuit of several miles. The country was
woods, high hills, and deep ravines. A glen that we entered after
leaving the river bore a strange resemblance to one on my father's
farm. As I looked around I could almost believe it was the same,
through which, on just such bright winter mornings, I had driven the
wood-sleigh or wandered with my gun. But the troops were marching, and
I had no time to grow homesick. We passed, in the course of our march,
a little log house. I went up to the door and spoke to the people. They
seemed sad and dispirited. There had been firing between the pickets a
day or two before, and a shower of balls had pattered around the house.
The woman said she wished she were forty miles away, and the man said
he would not care if he were a hundred.

A little girl was near the door, and I asked her what was her name, to
which she replied, after a good deal of embarrassment, "Nancy Ann." I
let Nancy Ann look through my spyglass; and, as she had never seen or
even heard of one before, she was very much astonished. Nancy Ann's
mother thereupon became quite hospitable, and invited me to come in and
rest, but the column was then well nigh over the hill and I had to push
on.

At last we reached the position assigned to us, and here we found the
Fourteenth Iowa, to which my friend belonged, and with it I determined
to remain until I could find my own regiment.

Around us were thick woods. A deep glen ran in front, and beyond this,
along the brow of the opposite hill, ran those earthworks of the rebels
which we were to win.

It was less than half a mile across; and occasionally a rifle ball fell
near us, but the distance was too great for them to be effective. I
looked through the trees and examined the hill with my glass, but could
see nothing save the ridge of fresh-turned earth. Along the side of
the hill were our sharpshooters watching the works. I could see them
crawling up behind trees and stumps, sometimes dragging themselves
along the ground, sometimes on their hands and knees. Their shots were
frequent, and sounded as though a sporting party were below us. It was
hard to believe that they were shooting at men. It was wonderful, too,
how soon the mind accustomed itself to these strange circumstances.
After the first half hour we took no more notice of the rifle shots
than though some boys were there at play. Behind those earthworks were
cannon as well as men. We were completely within range, and they could
have sent their shot and shell amongst us at any time. The night before
no fires had been allowed, as they would indicate our position to the
rebels; but they were now burning, and around one of them three or four
of us gathered to dine. As we sat down upon a log, we heard distant
sounds of cannon along the river. "There go the gunboats; the fight has
begun; they are shelling the rascals out," said everybody. We had taken
for granted all the time, and, indeed, up to the last minute, that the
gunboats would dismantle the fort, and that all we should have to do
would be to prevent the escape of the rebels. In this we were much
mistaken. The cannonade lasted an hour, and then stopped. We hoped the
fort was taken, but no such news came to gladden us.